Hey guys, welcome to Lecture 40.
And in this Lecture,
we'll be learning about outliers.
Okay, so, as always,
we'll import the usual.
I'm just gonna start copying and
pasting since we're doing this so often.
Okay.
So you got numpy as np,
panda as pd, Series and DataFrame.
So we're gonna see how we can
find outliers in a data set.
So in order to do that,
we're gonna use the NumPy generator.
So let's just say np.random, and
we'll use that seed, let's just say 12345.
And so
we've seeded our random generator, and
now let's actually use random,
DataFrame(np.random).
And I'm just gonna use randn.
And we'll say 1000 and 4 as your inputs.
So now we have our dataframe.
Let's go ahead and check a preview of it,
so we'll just see the first few rows.
Okay, and then let's go ahead and
we can use tail to see the last few rows.
All right, so we've got 1,000 rows and
then four columns,
index 0 through 3 and
index 0 through 999 on the rows.
Okay.
So we got all our information.
Let's go ahead and just describe the data.
And if you remember from our
describe summary statistics lecture,
all you gotta do is say .describe_method.
And so then we have the mean, the standard
deviation, the min, the max values, and
also the counts for each column.
Let's just go ahead and
select that first column.
So I'm gonna make an object called col,
C-O-L, and
then I'll say it's dframe[0] and
then let's go ahead and look at col.
Okay.
So now I have the first four values in
that column, five values, excuse me.
So now we can check which values
in the column are greater than 3.
So, for instance, I'll call column, and
then as we've seen before,
we can ask logic.
So I'm gonna say, np.abs, so
it's gonna be absolute value.
(col)>3.
Okay, so what I'm asking here is show me
column where the absolute value of
the column is greater than three.
So let's go ahead and check that.
Okay, so it looks like I got two of those.
So I have row 523 and row 900.
So those are both rows where
the absolute value of the row in
column 0 was greater than 3.
So that makes sense.
So we know now in column
0 the rows 523 and
900 have values with
absolute greater than 3.
What about all the columns?
So how can I do that?
So in a similar fashion I'll now
apply this to the whole dataframe.
Whoops, should be square brackets there.
And now I'm gonna say
mp.abs of the dframe,
the entire dataframe,
where it's greater than 3.
And then I'll say any, and
I'll pass the one as the argument, so
I'm gonna use the any method
to do the same thing.
So, now you see here,
it's returned every row in
my data frame where any
value that had a column,
that had an absolute value
greater than 3 was returned.
So I told my data frame hey, look at the
data frame, and where you see an absolute
value that's greater than 3 in any column,
return that row.
And so these are the rows, and
we can look at any one of them.
So for instance, 3 to 4, that one.
Its value in column 2 was 3.26,
so that's greater than 3.
Okay.
So, we could possibly cap the data at 3.
So how will we do that?
We could say dframe[np.abs|dframe)],
so the absolute value of
dframe again greater than 3.
So I'll set all those values and
I'm gonna say np.sign(dframe)*3.
So what does that mean,
what is this gonna do?
Cuz if we look at it again, let's see what
we're actually asking the dataframe to do.
So we're saying, anywhere in
the dataframe where the absolute
value at that point is greater then 3,
whoops.
Where the absolute value at that point
is greater than 3, let's go ahead and
set that equal to the sign of that value,
which will either be negative 1 or
1, and
then set it equal to that sign times 3.
So that means values such as
-3.18 here will turn into -3,
and values such as 3.36
here will turn into +3.
So we're gonna go ahead and
run that, okay.
And now let's go ahead and
look at dframe and describe.
Let's see what we get.
So if we scroll down to the min and the
max values, you'll notice now every min
has been capped at -3, and
every max has been capped at +3.
Let's go scroll back up and
see what we got before.
So you see we had minimums below -3 and
maximums above 3.
So using this any method,
we've been able to cap outliers.
So you can use the logic and
the .any in order to do that.
Okay, so that's about it as far
as outliers and capping them.
Now next we're gonna learn about
permutations, so I'll see you there.